# Expense Tracker
An expense tracker application built off the FARM stack (fast api, react and mongodb). Users can add, remove and read their expense items. Administrators can monitor user actions including login and logout, as well as updates to their personal expense list.

## Application Features
- User authentication: User login utilises password hashing and JWT session management.
- Per-user expense tracking: Each user can access their own list of expenses.
- Admin dashboard: Admin accounts can access the event log to check user actions.
- Event logging: Login, logouts as well as add or delete expense items are recorded.
- Input validation: Inputs are validated at login and when inputing an expense item.
- Alerts and confirm dialogs: Feedback provided to user upon certain actions (such as logging out).
- Dynamic Webpage: Single page application that updates without needing to reload.

## Application stack
- Frontend: React
- Backend: FastAPI
- Database: MongoDB
- Hashing: Bcrypt
- Session: Json Web Token


## Application structure
```
root/
frontend/
  index.html      - Index file
  src/
    action.css  
    action.jsx    - Access event logs
    expense.css
    expense.jsx   - Access per-user expenses
    login.css
    login.jsx     - Login page to either action or expense
    main.jsx      - Entry point of the app
backend/
  .env            - Securely stores SECRETS and DATABASE details (not available in this repository). 
  mongo_app.py    - Exposes endpoints to mongo db
  mongo_db.py     - Builds client connection and collections
  verify_connection.py  - Test mongodb connection
  verify_fastapi.py     - Test fastapi funcitonality
```

## Starting the app
This app was built off of the vite latest template.
The files displayed above in [Application Structure] is the primary source code for this app. All other files have been generated by the vite@latest template.

General steps

Prerequsities
* Node.js v22+
* MongoDB

1. Clone this repository into a project folder.

2. Create a new `.env` file in the backend/ folder with the following details
```
db_username=root
db_password=root
db_host=localhost
db_port=27017
db_auth_source=admin
db_name=mongo_expenses_app

db_users_collection_name=users
db_expenses_collection_name=expenses
db_actions_collection_name=actions

app_jwt_secret=fromfastapiimportFastAPIHTTPExceptionstatusDepends
```
4. Change directory to frontend and run `npm run dev` to start the frontend.

5. Change directory to backend and run `uvicorn mongo_app:app` to start the backend.

6. Open `http://localhost:5173` in your browser.

### Troubleshooting
Testing has shown that running npm run dev in the frontend may result in a permission error.
To get around this, we will need to create a new vite@latest template and replace the existing files in that template with the source code in this repository.

- Run npm create vite@latest in the root of the app folder.
  - Name: frontend
  - Framework: react
  - Variant: javascript
  - rolldown-vite: no
  - install npm and start: yes.
- Replace index.html with the one provided in this repository.
- Delete all files in the `/src` folder and replace all of them with the source code from this repository here.
- You will also need to install react-router-dom in the frontend `npm install react-router-dom`.

Now running npm run dev in the frontend folder should render the login page correctly.
If the environment is notrecognised, we need to replace the `.venv` with a new `.venv`. If this is so.
Create a new .venv python environment in the backend folder.
- You need to install fastapi and pymongo via `pip install "fastapi[standard]" and pip install pymongo`.
- Authentication is enabled for this database. An admin user with name: "root", pwd: "root", with role: "root" and db: "admin" is required.
- Security authourisation also needs to be enabled in the mongo config file.
- the verify_xxx.py files can help you check if the packages/programs are properlly installed and working.

Upon running `uvicorn mongo_app:app`, you may encounter a fatal error. This is due to an issue beyond my knowledge. Seemingly this occurs when the terminal in the backend enables the .venv environment.
To get around this, you will need to quickly copy and paste the above command into a freshly created terminal in the backend.


## Demonstration Accounts
| Email            | Password    | Role  |
| ---------------- | ----------- | ----- |
| admin@test.com   | admin       | admin |
| user1@test.com   | user1       | user  |
| user2@test.com   | user2       | user  |

## Database details
The application uses 3 mongo db collections.
- users - registered accounts and roles.
- expenses - record of expenses with title, amount, category, date, description and user's email.
- actions - a log of major actions in the application such as login, logout, and expense modifications.

A json_export folder has been provided in this repository that contains sample expense_items, actions and users that were used in the demonstration video. You may add them to the mongodb database via mongo compass.

## Workload
This application was developed and completed indivdually by Jason Dau.
